- This is a bird feeder,
and everything to my left is my attempt
at making it squirrel-proof.
If they want the bird seed,
they will first need to pass
through what is basically
an eight-part "Ninja Warrior"
obstacle course for squirrels.
This course is extremely challenging.
It is not for the timid of heart.
But out of the gate,
I will admit that in hindsight
that I completely
underestimated my adversary.
Now if you're wondering why I would go
through all this trouble,
we need to go back eight weeks ago
when I found myself stuck
at home and very bored.
So I installed a bird feeder
and decided to become a birdwatcher,
and it was just so lovely
(birds chirping)
(record scratches)
until they showed up.
Now, luckily, my bird feeder
had a wire cage around it,
big enough for the birds to slip inside
but small enough to prevent the squirrels
from getting the food,
and that worked really
well until right here.
For me, this was like the
moment in "Jurassic Park"
when they realized the
Velociraptors can open door handles.
And once the door was open,
it was clear this wasn't
their first rodeo.
They basically cleared this
whole tube of bird seed
by the end of the day.
Mind you, this bird feeder was advertised
as being squirrel-proof.
So I bought another
squirrel-proof bird feeder
to replace it.
It's got this outer cage
suspended by some springs,
and so if a bird comes and lands here,
it doesn't weigh that much
and it has access to the seeds.
However, if a squirrel comes,
they'll grab onto this cage.
Its weight will force the springs down,
thereby preventing access to the seeds.
I have no idea
how the squirrels could
possibly outsmart this,
but let's see.
And this one work exactly as intended.
You can see the birds love it,
but when the squirrel comes along,
the cage shifts down
and now all the seed ports are covered up.
Every time they tried,
it was the same results.
However, the next morning,
this guy manages to unclip the springs
that hold the cage up,
which means the cage stays
in the lowered position
where it blocks all the seed openings.
Problem with that is now
they can get to the lid.
But this bird feeder
lid doesn't hinge open
to give direct access,
so he goes with a different tactic,
(bird feeder clanking)
(birds chirping)
where he now has access to
all the bird seed he wants.
And so I decided I would try
one more bird feeder design.
Okay. Wow.
It almost feels intentional at this point.
This one's supposed to work well
because it's got this baffle,
which is supposed to keep the squirrels
from just coming straight
down and getting to the seeds,
and more importantly,
there's no way for them to rip this off.
We'll see.
This one debuted to similar results.
As he hangs by a few toes,
this is when I really started
to gain an appreciation
for what they were capable of.
It definitely seemed like this bird feeder
was their favorite.
Okay, yeah, they're
flexing on me for sure.
And at this point, a plan
was forming in my head,
but just to be thorough,
I moved the post away from the fence.
And I can't say I was surprised
when they just climbed it,
nor was I surprised to
see they could shimmy up
and down a small metal pole
or even a large one for that matter.
And whether they could climb
a certain pole material
was a moot point anyways because of this!
Look at this!
These guys are basically freaking
rodent-sized Simone Biles!
And on some level,
this is what it felt like
when someone stole a package
from my porch that didn't belong to them,
and I harnessed that indignation,
spending a year designing the
glitter bomb bait package.
- Hello.
(glitter bomb whirring)
- [Mark] Complete with special fragrances.
- Aw.
- If I could design a
package to deter thieves,
could I design a bird
feeder to deter squirrels?
And so after a couple
weeks of brainstorming,
designing, and building
with my buddy John,
we put it all together in
this 20-second build montage.
(upbeat music)
(tools whirring)
(aerosol can hissing)
(metal clanking)
(drill whirring)
Here are the basic elements.
For starters,
here's where I've placed
their favorite bird feeder,
at the end of the course.
And to sweeten the deal,
right below that, there's a trapdoor.
And if they step here,
it releases a butt-ton of walnuts
and unfurls some celebratory banners.
Why walnuts? I'm glad you asked.
I'm using walnuts because
over the course of a week,
I put out a buffet of seven
different nuts and seeds.
And all four times I
repeated the experiment,
walnuts were always
the one they ate first.
What's great about placing this here
is it levels the playing
field as the birds can fly up
and get as much food as they
want anytime they need it.
The squirrels, however,
will have to work for it
because the only way to
make it to this platform
is if they work their way
through my eight-part "Ninja
Warrior" obstacle course,
which all starts right here.
This is the only platform on the course
that has a pole that isn't
covered in slippery stuff,
which means this is where
they have to climb up
to enter the course.
If they try and get up any other way,
they can't keep a good grip
and they just slide back down.
So the first challenge is
the Bridge of Instability.
Now, this may look easy,
but the trick is it attaches
at a single point on each end.
And from a physics standpoint,
that makes it no different
than trying to crawl across a tightrope.
It's the same deceptive principle
with that one carnival
game that's so impossible.
I broke it down in another
video where I use physics
to show which carnival
games were basically scams
and the science on how to beat them.
Next up, the Maze of a Thousand Corridors.
This one's a bit more cerebral,
but if they make it through that,
it will bring 'em to
the Pitchfork Tumblers,
which are inspired by the show "Wipe Out."
But unlike "Wipe Out,"
I should point out
that all these contraptions
are squirrel-friendly,
and even with a little back force,
they will break away and stop spinning.
Now, if they can make it
past the Pitchfork Tumblers of Treachery,
they come to one of my personal favorites,
the Homewrecker.
(romantic music)
I put her in to tempt the
squirrel to lose focus
on the real prize at
the end of the course.
Because this pad has a
pressure sensor underneath it
and it connects to a microcontroller
that has a relay that
connects to a solenoid
that connects to a pneumatic piston
that connects back to this platform
with the pressure sensor,
and so if they stand here
for more than three seconds,
they've gotta start the
course all over again.
Next up is the Slinky Bridge of Deception.
I've suspended a juicy
walnut right in the middle,
but there's no way this bridge
will support their weight.
So it'll be interesting to
see how they approach it.
The sixth challenge is
called the Tourist Trap.
It's actually a bit of a
reward for making it this far.
If the squirrel sticks their head
through this board my wife painted,
it's just a photo op
they can hang on the wall
of their tiny squirrel nest.
I'll place a walnut here as an incentive
for them not to miss
this unique opportunity.
The penultimate challenge
are the Quad Steps of Great Elevation.
This is taken straight
from "Ninja Warrior,"
and this is super tricky
because these pads are all totally smooth
and placed at a 45-degree incline.
And now for the last challenge.
At this point,
they are a near few feet away
from their ultimate goal.
But if they're not careful,
they'll have to deal with
the Orbital Assist Platform,
aka the Final Countdown,
aka "It's not a catapult,
it's a squirrel-pult,"
which means they now have to go back
and start all the way
over from the beginning.
Now, if they wanna avoid that fate,
they just need to stand on this pad
for less than three seconds.
But once again, I've
placed a diversion here.
This one projects an optical illusion
of anything you place in
the bottom of this dish.
It's actually super trippy
and looks even more
impressive in real life
because the projected image is 3D.
They're like nine bucks on Amazon,
and I put a link that
explains the juicy physics
of how they work in the video description.
Now with regards to squirrel safety,
I know I seem to have this reputation of
(fire sizzling)
(glass shattering)
(people screaming)
improvised high-speed projectiles,
and so this one might worry a
few animal lovers out there,
including my wife.
We have five pets and one child,
and the child was the
only one I had a say in.
So rest assured, I can adjust
the pressure on the piston,
and we'll be staying way
below any launch force
that could hurt any of our
adorable backyard contestants.
And so, finally, after
making it through all that,
we're back here at the world's
most satisfying bird feeder.
And as far as I'm concerned,
if they make it here,
they've earned the right
to gorge next to the birds
for as long as they want.
And so after nearly a month of prep work,
the course was officially
open for business.
(lighthearted music)
They could smell the walnuts
at the final station,
and you could see the gears turning
because right above that was
their favorite bird feeder.
And so before long, we
had our first contender.
(bright electronic music)
That didn't exactly go as planned,
so Rick decides to regroup.
Speaking of which, that's Rick.
There are a total of four competitors
that will be attempting the course.
First up is Rick, and he weighs 500 grams.
I know this 'cause he's actually standing
on a custom-made scale.
Rick is very clever as
you'll see here in a minute,
but he also gets spooked easily.
Next up is Marty.
He's basically
indistinguishable from Rick.
Rick and Marty are inseparable
and pretty much spend all
their time together as a pair.
Our third contender is Frank,
also coming in around 500 grams.
He's very gutsy. He's also kinda dumb.
Finally, we've got my
personal favorite, Phat Gus.
He's just really charming
and will strike a pose
if he sees a camera.
He also really likes to eat,
and he tips the scales at
an impressive 800 grams.
While most of the squirrels
are kind of particular
before making a selection
and then gracefully leaping away,
Phat Gus just goes for it, hands-free,
just makes himself real comfortable.
Here he is laying out with a light snack
from the bird feeder.
I mean, you can't fault the guy
for just clearly appreciating a good meal.
So now that you know our four contenders,
let's get back to Rick.
So he hops back on,
and he's actually doing
better than his first attempt.
Mm, just barely.
This is the best because he's like,
"Okay, I got this. Nevermind.
Well, maybe I, no, I definitely don't."
And this was the exact moment I realized
I just might be outmatched here.
(playful music)
Marty was watching Rick
and, after a quick dip
of his toes in the water,
adopts his strategy right out of the gate.
Ooh, so close, but an excellent recovery.
And Phat Gus, perhaps predictably,
comes up a little short,
which brings us to the Maze
of a Thousand Corridors,
which, to be honest, they
mastered this one pretty quickly.
Here's a solid run from Phat Gus.
And now for the Pitchfork
Tumblers of Treachery.
Marty was like, "Yeah,
that's a hard pass."
Phat Gus is just like, "Abort!"
Frank is just like, "Nope."
Then he's like, "Wait a second.
Mm, still nope."
Then Marty flies in real hot over the top.
He didn't make it through,
but that's partial credit
as far as I'm concerned.
And then here's Phat Gus with
my favorite attempt by far.
(bright music)
And then Frank shows no fear,
which helps him pull up
this near-flawless run.
And finally, Smart Rick
surgically weaves his way through
essentially untouched.
And I should mention,
the squirrels were most
active from 6:00 to 10:00 AM,
so every morning I've been
getting up before the sunrise
to start filming from in my house,
like one of those camouflage
nature photographers,
only like a suburbanized version.
I've also had a handful of
streaming cameras rolling 24/7,
which has allowed me to
make such discoveries
as we have the world's worst guard dog.
Thanks for the help, pal.
Now back to the Homewrecker.
You could see Rick is
instinctively suspicious
of this gold digger
and only for a brief
moment puts his full weight
on the platform.
I told you he was smart.
His buddy Marty, on the other hand...
She is a cruel mistress.
And because I know my
wife is going to ask me,
no, this will not hurt the
squirrel for two reasons.
Number one, they are amazing like cats
and always land on their feet.
And two, they themselves were jumping
from this height all the time,
and in some cases, much higher.
In fact, squirrels are
one of the few mammals
that can survive a fall from any height
because they make their
terminal velocity so low.
You can see it right here.
They make their body as flat as possible,
then put their tail back to increase drag.
They basically become their own parachute.
And then right before they land,
they pull in and fully
extend their arms and legs
to act as shock absorbing landing gear.
This is so cool.
Now back to the course
where even Smart Rick
eventually lets his guard down,
which is exactly when she strikes.
But just like all the
other obstacles so far,
after a day or two, they'd mastered it.
In this case,
even disregarding her
offering of a fresh walnut.
Now onto the Slinky Bridge of Deception,
and this was the sleeper
obstacle in my book.
That is not a large gap,
which they can easily jump,
but having the slinky there
just threw them off somehow.
You can see how much
Frank is struggling here,
and he's the brave one.
And Rick only jumps when Marty shows up
for emotional support.
But like all the obstacles so far,
after a day or two, they'd mastered it.
Now onto our third to last
obstacle, the Tourist Trap,
and this one was just a freaking delight.
A little peanut butter
really did the trick here.
(camera shutter clicks)
(playful music)
Now here comes Phat Gus.
And I mean, how Phat Gus is this?
He sees the camera and he's like,
"Paint me like one of
your French squirrels.
Yeah? No?
No takers? All right."
Here's another classic Gus
where he looks at the
camera, wait a second.
Play that back,
(electronic whirring)
and freeze.
Zoom, enhance.
(electronic beeping)
(record scratches)
(eerie music)
(air whooshes)
(keyboard clacking)
(lighthearted music)
Well, turns out Phat Gus is
not a dude and he's pregnant,
which meant I was suddenly
feeling real uncomfortable
about all those weight comments.
So after a bit of a pivot
to smooth things over,
we soldiered on to the Quad
Steps of Great Elevation.
Frank comes in rather
confident, almost to his demise,
but he pulls off the smooth recovery.
So after not much time at all,
they were looking pretty good here.
In fact, one morning,
I noticed Marty totally skipped
the last step altogether,
which I took as a challenge,
and so I removed the middle
step to see what they would do.
And who else but Phantastic Gus?
Let's slow that down a bit.
They're such amazing jumpers,
so I suppose the quick mastery
here wasn't a surprise.
I mean, this right here is
probably a 10-foot jump.
And here's some classic
brave but dumb Frank.
He'd already entered the course normally
and made it to the Homewrecker
at least a dozen times
by this point,
and yet for some reason,
he decides this 12-foot jump
is his best course of action.
And Smart Rick was the first
one to enter the course.
So in the end, after
about a week of effort,
it was fitting he was the one
to make it to the jackpot first.
And he's so stoked
he apparently wants to run
the whole course in reverse.
In hindsight,
we probably should have made
the jackpot a little quieter.
Here's Marty, as always, not far behind.
(light music)
He's also a bit flighty as you know,
which worked against him here,
because down below,
Phantastic Gus, ever the opportunist,
comes through with the
real stroke of brilliance.
But pretty soon, Marty comes back like,
"Um, I'm the one who kinda earned that."
And then Phantastic Gus is like,
"You snooze, you lose, sucker!"
And might I just say, Phantastic Gus,
when you sit like that,
you don't look an ounce over 700 grams.
Eventually, they learned
that sound was a good thing
and they'd quickly return for their reward
before Phantastic Gus got any ideas.
So here's a single camera
shot of a full run.
And by the end, all of them
could do the full course
in less than 40 seconds.
And while we're watching,
you might be wondering what
happened to the squirrel-pult.
Unfortunately, they didn't
really fall for my illusion much,
but I'm about to show you
the two times they did.
And as a promise to my wife,
I turned the pressure
to only 40% full power,
so the acceleration
the squirrel would feel
is about half a g,
which is 10 times less than
a typical rollercoaster.
Additionally, I never turned on
either the Homewrecker
trapdoor or the launch platform
when I wasn't actively
watching from inside my house
where I had a manual override button,
because as safe as it was,
something about launching Phantastic Gus
just didn't feel right.
Now what you're about to see
is gonna look pretty chaotic.
But when we check the slow-mo, amazingly,
I'll show you how the squirrel is totally
in control pretty much the whole time.
All right, now here's a second angle.
Also, even if you don't
trust my calculations,
I can assure you that the
squirrels did not care.
In both launch cases,
they were back up on the
course in like five minutes.
Here's the slow-mo,
and see if you could spot the
two critical things he does
to make sure he lands feet down.
Did you catch it?
The first critical moment is right here.
He's already done the predictive math,
and he's locked his head on the
spot where he plans to land.
And now his head will not lose
that lock the whole way down.
What's crazy is the time it takes him
to do all the predictive math
to know exactly where he will land
and to lock his head is 300 milliseconds.
That's exactly this long.
Literally less than the blink of an eye.
That blows my mind.
But if you think about it,
it makes sense these
reactions would've evolved
to be razor-sharp
if you live your life in the trees
constantly making split-second decisions.
Now, besides picking the
landing spot with his head,
the second trick is with his arms.
When he wants to keep his
upper body from rotating,
he has his arms out.
But the moment he wants to
rotate his upper body quickly,
he tucks them in.
And then when he wants to stop rotating,
he extends them out again.
This is straight up conservation
of angular momentum.
It's the same trick ice skaters use.
Basically, bring your limbs
in if you want to rotate fast,
extend them out if you
wanna slow the rotation.
My buddy Destin from Smarter Every Day
also made a video analyzing
how cats always land
on their feet,
and they do the exact same two tricks.
The head target lock
and bringing limbs in to rotate
and out to stop rotation.
(air whooshes)
Here's the second launch.
So this may look like
pure luck in real time,
but the slow-mo tells a different story.
In that amount of time,
he's already made a slight
lateral push in that direction
and locked his landing
target with his head.
We know from the previous
clip he can rotate his body
to any orientation,
but he doesn't in this case
because he sees his small
push has already aligned him
for the perfect landing.
That's just so cool.
And so after those two
physics demonstrations,
I disabled both the Launcher
and the Homewrecker trapdoor
and just let them enjoy
the course in peace.
As far as I was concerned,
they had earned it.
Plus, after spending a month together,
we were sort of bros by this point.
If they saw me coming out to work,
they would certainly jump away,
but then they'd just
quickly be right back.
And sadly, all good things
must come to an end.
And because I didn't want them
to develop an unhealthy
dependence on my handouts,
after about a week of free
reign, I took down the course.
But in its place,
I put up a specialized
squirrel-sized picnic table.
Every morning,
this door opens to
release just a few walnuts
as a little treat to remind
them of our good times together.
Although I had to laugh
that after all this,
somehow I didn't anticipate on day one
Frank would immediately try and figure out
and partially succeed in finding
a way to beat the system.
Like everything else though,
they quickly caught on,
and now on some mornings,
I'll catch them just waiting
for the daily ration,
chilling patiently on the bench seat,
that is, everyone but Phantastic Gus.
Don't ever change, buddy.
When I started this
two-month-long adventure
trying to bird-watch,
I had no idea I would enjoy
squirrel-watching so much more.
It's also made me realize that
even amongst the structures
and pavement and power lines,
how interesting nature can be
in a single suburban backyard
if you just really stop to look.
Even the plants are amazing!
I had no idea that as vines grow,
they spin around looking
for something to grab onto.
I didn't anticipate the
wide variety of animals
that use fences as inner yard highways
to get around as a substitute
for all the trees that existed
before we got here.
Even little interactions like
this spider extending his life
with this very timely leap
into the unknown were
just so delightful to see.
But of all the animals,
I can definitively say now that squirrels
are my absolute favorite,
and they're certainly a
more formidable adversary
than porch pirates.
They're kind of adorable,
incredibly crafty, curious by nature,
athletic, and persistent.
Turns out, squirrels can
live to be 20 years old,
and so I like to think that someday,
Phantastic Gus will bring his
grand-squirrels to the fence
and regale them with tales
of cowboys and courage
and legendary walnut piles.
(lighthearted music)